<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Record Thirty-Six</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-36" epub:type="chapter">
 			<header>
				<h2 epub:type="title">Record Thirty-Six</h2>
				<p epub:type="bridgehead">Empty Pages—The Christian God—About My Mother</p>
 			</header>
			<p>It is very strange that a kind of empty white page should be left in my head. How I walked there, how I waited (I remember I had to wait), I know nothing about it; I remember not a sound, not a face, not a gesture, as if all communicating wires between me and the world were cut.</p>
			<p>When I came to, I found myself standing before Him; I feared to raise my eyes⁠—I saw only His enormous cast-iron hands upon His knees. Those hands weighed upon Him, bending His knees with their weight. He was slowly moving His fingers. His face was somewhere above as if in fog. And, only because His voice came to my ear from such a height, it did not roar like thunder, it did not deafen me but appeared to be an ordinary human voice.</p>
			<p>“Then you too, you the Builder of the <i>Integral</i>! You, whose lot it was to become the greatest of all <i>conquistadores</i>! You whose name was to have been at the head of a glorious, new chapter of the history of the United State! You. …”</p>
			<p>Blood ran to my head, to my cheeks⁠—and here again a white page; only the pulsation in my temples and the heavy voice from above; but I remember not a word. Only when He became silent I came to and noticed how His hand moved heavily like a thousand pounds, and crawled slowly⁠—a finger threatened me.</p>
			<p>“Well! Why are you silent? Is it true, or not? Executioner? So!”</p>
			<p>“So,” I repeated submissively. And then I clearly heard every word of His.</p>
			<p>“Well then? Do you think I am afraid of the word! Did you ever try to take off its shell and look into its inner meaning? I shall tell you. … Remember a blue hill, a crowd, a cross? Some up on the hill, sprinkled with blood, are busy nailing a body to the cross; others below, sprinkled with tears, are gazing upward. Does it not seem to you that the part which those above must play is the more difficult, the most important part? If it were not for them, how could that magnificent tragedy ever have been staged? True, they were hissed by the dark crowd but for that the author of the tragedy, God, should have remunerated them the more liberally, should he not? And the Christian, most clement God himself, who burnt on a slow fire all the infidels, is he not an executioner? Was the number of those burned by the Christians less than the number of burned Christians? Yet (you must understand this!), yet this God was for centuries glorified as the God of love! Absurd? Oh, no. Just the contrary. It is rather a patent for the imperishable wisdom of man, written in blood. Even at the time when he still was wild and hairy man knew that real, algebraic love for humanity must inevitably be inhuman, and that the inevitable mark of truth is cruelty, just as the inevitable mark of fire is its property of causing the sensation of burning. Could you show me a fire that would not hurt? Well, prove now your point! Proceed! Argue!”</p>
			<p>How could I argue? How could I argue when those thoughts were once mine, though I was never able to dress them in such a splendid, tempered armor. I remained silent.</p>
			<p>“If your silence is intended to mean that you agree with me, then let us talk as adults do after the children have gone to bed; let us talk to the logical end. I ask: what was it that man from his diaper age dreamed of, tormented himself for, prayed for? He longed for that day when someone would tell him what happiness is and then would chain him to it. What else are we doing now? The ancient dream about a paradise. … Remember: there in paradise they know no desires any more, no pity, no love; there they are all⁠—blessed. An operation has been performed upon their centre of fancy; that is why they are blessed, angels, servants of God. … And now, at the very moment when we have caught up with that dream, when we hold it like this”: (He clenched his hand so, that if he had held a stone in it sap would have run out!) “At the moment when all that was left for us was to adorn our prize and distribute it amongst all in equal pieces, at that very moment you, you. …”</p>
			<p>The cast-iron roar was suddenly broken off. I was as red as a piece of iron on an anvil, under the moulding sledge-hammer. This seemed to have stopped for a second, hanging in air, and I waited, waited … until suddenly:</p>
			<p>“How old are you?”</p>
			<p>“Thirty-two.”</p>
			<p>“Just double the age, and as simple as at sixteen! Listen. Is it possible that it really never occurred to you that <i>they</i> (we do not yet know their names but I am certain you will disclose them to us), that <i>they</i> were interested in you only as the Builder of the <i>Integral?</i> only in order to be able through the use of you⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Don’t! Don’t!” I cried. But it was like protecting yourself with your hands and crying to a bullet: you may still be hearing your own “don’t” but the bullet meanwhile has burned you through, and writhing with pain, you are prostrated on the ground.</p>
			<p>Yes, yes; the Builder of the <i>Integral</i>. … Yes, yes. … At once there came back to me the angry face of U- with twitching, brick-red gills, on that morning when both of them. …</p>
			<p>I remember now, clearly, how I raised my eyes and laughed. A Socrates-like, bald-headed man was sitting before me; and small drops of sweat dotted the bald surface of his cranium.</p>
			<p>How simple, how magnificently trivial everything was! How simple! Almost to the point of being ridiculous. Laughter was choking me and bursting forth in puffs; I covered my mouth with my hand and rushed wildly out. …</p>
			<p>Steps. Wind. Damp, leaping fragments of lights and faces. … And while running: “No! Only to see her! To see her once more!”</p>
			<p>Here again, an empty white page. All I remember is feet; not people, just feet; hundreds of feet, confusedly stamping feet, falling from somewhere on the pavement; a heavy rain of feet. … And some cheerful, daring voice, and a shout that was probably for me: “Hey, hey! Come here! Come along with us!”</p>
			<p>Afterward⁠—a deserted square heavily overloaded with tense wind. In the middle of the square a dim, heavy threatening mass⁠—the Machine of the Well-Doer; and a seemingly unexpected image arose within me in response to the sight of the Machine: a snow-white pillow and on the pillow a head thrown back, and half-closed eyes and a sharp, sweet line of teeth. … All this seemed so absurdly, so terribly connected with the Machine. I know <i>how</i> this connection has come about but I do not yet want to see it nor to say it aloud⁠—I don’t want to! I do not!</p>
			<p>I closed my eyes, sat down on the steps which lead upwards to the Machine. I must have been running for my face was wet. From somewhere very far away cries were coming. But nobody heard them; nobody heard me crying: “Save me from it⁠—save me!”</p>
			<p>If only I had a mother as the ancients had⁠—my mother, <i>mine</i>, for whom I should be not the Builder of the <i>Integral</i> and not D-530, not a molecule of the United State but merely a living human piece, a piece of herself, a trampled, smothered, a cast-off piece. … And though I were driving the nails into the cross or being nailed to it (perhaps it is the same), she would hear what no one else could hear; her old grown-together wrinkled lips. …</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
