<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Record Twenty-Five</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-25" epub:type="chapter">
			<header>
				<h2>
					<span epub:type="se:label">Record</span>
					<span epub:type="z3998:ordinal">Twenty-Five</span>
				</h2>
				<p epub:type="se:bridgehead">The descent from heaven‚ÅÝ‚ÄîThe greatest catastrophe in history‚ÅÝ‚ÄîThe known ‚∏ª is ended.</p>
			</header>
			<p>At the beginning all arose, and the hymn, like a solemn mantle, slowly waved above our heads. Hundreds of tubes of the Musical Tower and millions of human voices. For a second I forgot everything; I forgot that alarming something at which <span epub:type="z3998:personal-name">I-330</span> hinted in connection with today‚Äôs celebration; I think I even forgot about her. At that moment I was the very same little boy who once wept because of a tiny ink-stain on his unif, which no one else could see. Even if it be so, if nobody sees that I am covered with black, ineffaceable stains, I know it, do I not? I know that there should be no place for a criminal like me among these frank open faces. What if I should rush forward and shout out all at once everything about myself! The end might follow. Let it! At least for a second I would feel myself clear and clean and senseless like that innocent blue sky.‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶</p>
			<p>All eyes were directed upward; in the pure morning blue, still moist with the tears of night, a small dark spot appeared. Now it was dark, now bathed in the rays of the sun. It was He, descending to us from the sky, He‚ÅÝ‚Äîthe new Jehovah‚ÅÝ‚Äîin an aero, He, as wise and as lovingly cruel as the Jehovah of the ancients. Nearer and nearer, and higher toward him were drawn millions of hearts. Already he saw us. And in my mind with Him I looked over everything from the heights: concentric circles of stands marked with dotted blue lines of unifs‚ÅÝ‚Äîlike circles of a spiderweb strewn with microscopic suns (the shining of the badges). And in the centre there soon the wise white spider would occupy his place‚ÅÝ‚Äîthe Well-Doer clad in white, the Well-Doer who wisely tangled our hands and feet in the salutary net of happiness.</p>
			<p>His magnificent descent from the sky was accomplished. The brassy Hymn came to silence; all sat down. At once I perceived that everything was really a very thin spiderweb, the threads of which were stretched tense and trembling, and it seemed that in a moment those threads might break and something improbable.‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶</p>
			<p>I half rose and looked around, and I met many lovingly-worried eyes which passed from one face to another. I saw someone lifting his hand and almost imperceptibly waving his fingers‚ÅÝ‚Äîhe was making signs to another. The latter replied with a similar finger-sign. And a third.‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ I understood; they were the Guardians. I understood; they were alarmed by something‚ÅÝ‚Äîthe spiderweb was stretched and trembling. And within me as if tuned to the same wavelength of a radio, within me there was a corresponding quiver.</p>
			<p>On the platform a poet was reciting his pre-electoral ode. I could not hear a single word; I only felt the rhythmic swing of the hexametric pendulum, and with its every motion I felt how nearer and nearer there was approaching some hour set for.‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ I continued to turn over face after face like pages but I could not find the one, the only one, I was seeking, the one I needed to find at once, as soon as possible, for one more swing of the pendulum and.‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶</p>
			<p>It was he, certainly it was he! Below, past the main platform, gliding over the sparkling glass, the ear-wings flapped by, the running body gave a reflection of a double-curved <span epub:type="z3998:personal-name">S-</span>, like a noose which was rolling toward some of the intricate passages among the stands. <span epub:type="z3998:personal-name">S-</span>, <span epub:type="z3998:personal-name">I-330</span>‚ÅÝ‚Äîthere is some thread between them. I have always felt some thread between them. I don‚Äôt know yet what that thread is but some day I shall untangle it. I planted my gaze on him; he was rushing farther away, behind him that invisible thread.‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ There he stopped‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ there.‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ I was pierced, twisted together into a knot as if by a lightning-like, many-volted electric discharge; in my row, not more than 40¬∞ from me, <span epub:type="z3998:personal-name">S-</span> stopped and bowed. I saw <span epub:type="z3998:personal-name">I-330</span> and beside her the smiling, repellent, negro-lipped <span epub:type="z3998:personal-name">R-13</span>.</p>
			<p>My first thought was to rush to her and cry, ‚ÄúWhy with him? Why did you not want‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶‚Ää?‚Äù But the salutary invisible spiderweb bound fast my hands and feet; so, gritting my teeth together I sat stiff as iron, my gaze fixed upon them. A sharp <em>physical</em> pain at my heart. I remember my thought: ‚Äúif nonphysical causes effect physical pain, then it is clear that.‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶‚Äù</p>
			<p>I regret that I did not come to any conclusion. I remember only that something about ‚Äúsoul‚Äù flashed through my mind, a purely nonsensical ancient expression, ‚ÄúHis soul fell into his boots‚Äù passed through my head. My heart sank. The hexameter came to an end. It was about to start. What ‚ÄúIt‚Äù?</p>
			<p>The five minute pre-election recess established by custom. The custom-established pre-electional silence. But now it was not that pious, really prayer-like silence that it usually was. Now it was as in the ancient days when there were no Accumulating Towers, when the sky, still untamed in those days, would roar from time to time with its ‚Äústorms.‚Äù It was like the ‚Äúlull before the storm‚Äù of the ancient days. The air seemed to be made of transparent, vaporized cast-iron. One wanted to breathe with one‚Äôs mouth wide open. My hearing, intense to painfulness, registered from behind a mouse-like, gnawing, worried whisper. Without lifting my eyes I saw those two, <span epub:type="z3998:personal-name">I-330</span> and <span epub:type="z3998:personal-name">R-13</span>, side by side, shoulder to shoulder‚ÅÝ‚Äîand on my knees my trembling, foreign, hateful, hairy hands.‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶</p>
			<p>Everybody was holding a badge with a clock in his hands. One.‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ Two.‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ Three.‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ Five minutes. From the main platform a cast-iron, slow voice:</p>
			<p>‚ÄúThose in favor shall lift their hands.‚Äù</p>
			<p>If only I dared to look straight into his eyes as formerly! Straight and devotedly, and think: ‚ÄúHere I am, my whole self! Take me!‚Äù But now I did not dare. I had to make an effort to raise my hand, as if my joints were rusty.</p>
			<p>A whisper of millions of hands. Someone‚Äôs subdued ‚ÄúAh!‚Äù and I felt something was coming, falling heavily, but I could not understand what it was, and I did not have the strength or courage to take a look.‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶</p>
			<p>‚ÄúThose opposed?‚Äù‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶</p>
			<p>This was always the most magnificent moment of our celebration: all would remain sitting motionless, joyfully bowing their heads under the salutary yoke of that Number of Numbers. But now, to my horror again I heard a rustle; light as a sigh, yet it was more distinct even than the brass tube of the Hymn. Thus the last sigh in a man‚Äôs life, around him people with their faces pale and with drops of cold sweat upon their foreheads.‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ I lifted my eyes and.‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶</p>
			<p>It took one hundredth of a second only; I saw thousands of hands arise ‚Äúopposed‚Äù and fall back. I saw the pale cross-marked face of <span epub:type="z3998:personal-name">I-330</span> and her lifted hand. Darkness came upon my eyes.</p>
			<p>Another hundredth of a second, silence. Quiet. The pulse. Then, as if at the sign of some mad conductor, from all the stands rattling, shouting, a whirlwind of unifs lifted by the rush, the perplexed figures of the Guardians running to and fro. Someone‚Äôs heels in the air near my eyes and close to those heels someone‚Äôs wide-open mouth tearing itself by an inaudible scream. For some reason this picture remains particularly distinct in my memory: thousands of mouths noiselessly yelling as if on the screen of a monstrous cinema. Also as if on a screen, somewhere below at a distance, for a second‚ÅÝ‚Äî<span epub:type="z3998:personal-name">O-90</span>, pressed against the wall in a passage, her lips white, defending her abdomen with her crossed arms. She disappeared as if washed away by a wave, or else I simply forgot her because.‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶</p>
			<p>This not on the screen any more but within me, within my compressed heart, within the rapidly pulsating temples; over my head, somewhat to the left, <span epub:type="z3998:personal-name">R-13</span> suddenly jumped upon a bench, all sprinkling, red, rabid. In his arms was <span epub:type="z3998:personal-name">I-330</span>, pale, her unif torn from shoulder to breast, red blood on white. She firmly held him round the neck, and he with huge leaps from bench to bench, repellent and agile, like a gorilla, was carrying her away upward.</p>
			<p>As if it were in a fire of ancient days, everything became red around me. Only one thing in my head: to jump after them, to catch them. At this moment I cannot explain to myself the source of that strength within me, but like a battering-ram I broke through the crowd, over somebody‚Äôs shoulders, over a bench and I was there in a moment and caught <span epub:type="z3998:personal-name">R-13</span> by the collar:</p>
			<p>‚ÄúDon‚Äôt you dare! Don‚Äôt you dare, I say! Immediately‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚Äù</p>
			<p>Fortunately no one could hear my voice, as everyone was shouting and running.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúWho is it? What is the matter? What‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚Äù <span epub:type="z3998:personal-name">R-13</span> turned around; his sprinkling lips were trembling. He apparently thought it was one of the Guardians.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúWhat? I do not want‚ÅÝ‚ÄîI won‚Äôt allow‚ÅÝ‚ÄîPut her down at once!‚Äù</p>
			<p>But he only sprinkled angrily with his lips, shook his head and ran on. Then I‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ I am terribly ashamed to write all this down but I believe I must, so that you, my unknown readers, may make a complete study of my disease.‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ Then I hit him over the head with all my might. You understand? I hit him. This I remember distinctly. I remember also a feeling of liberation that followed my action, a feeling of lightness in my whole body.</p>
			<p><span epub:type="z3998:personal-name">I-330</span> slid quickly out of his arms.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúGo away!‚Äù she shouted to <span epub:type="z3998:personal-name">R-</span>, ‚ÄúDon‚Äôt you see that he‚ÅÝ‚Äî? Go!‚Äù</p>
			<p><span epub:type="z3998:personal-name">R-13</span> showed his white negro teeth, sprinkled into my face some word, dived down and disappeared. And I picked up <span epub:type="z3998:personal-name">I-330</span>, pressed her firmly to myself and carried her away.</p>
			<p>My heart was beating forcibly. It seemed enormous. And with every beat it would splash out such a thundering, such a hot, such a joyful wave! A flash: ‚ÄúLet them, below there, let them toss and rush and yell and fall; what matter if something has fallen, if something has been shattered to dust?‚ÅÝ‚ÄîLittle matter! Only to remain this way and carry her, carry and carry.‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶‚Äù</p>
			<section id="chapter-25-later">
				<header>
					<p>The Same Evening, Twenty-Two O‚ÄôClock.</p>
				</header>
				<p>I hold my pen with great difficulty. Such an extraordinary fatigue after all the dizzying events of this morning. Is it possible that the strong, salutary, centuries-old walls of the United State have fallen? Is it possible that we are again without a roof over our heads, back in the wild state of freedom like our remote ancestors? Is it possible that we have lost our Well-Doer? ‚ÄúOpposed!‚Äù On the Day of Unanimity‚ÅÝ‚Äîopposed! I am ashamed of <em>them</em>, painfully, fearfully ashamed.‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ But who are ‚Äúthey‚Äù? And who am I? ‚ÄúThey,‚Äù ‚ÄúWe‚Äù‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶‚Ää? Do I know?</p>
				<p>I shall continue.</p>
				<p>She was sitting where I had brought her on the uppermost glass bench which was hot from the sun. Her right shoulder and the beginning of the wonderful and incalculable curve were uncovered‚ÅÝ‚Äîan exceedingly thin serpent of blood. She seemed not to be aware of the blood, or that her breast was uncovered. No, I will say rather: she seemed to see all that and seemed to feel that it was essential to her, that if her unif were buttoned she would have torn it, she would have.‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶</p>
				<p>‚ÄúAnd tomorrow!‚Äù She breathed the words through sparkling white clenched teeth, ‚ÄúTomorrow, nobody knows what‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ do you understand? Neither I nor anyone else knows; it is unknown! Do you realize what a joy it is? Do you realize that all that was certain has come to an end? Now‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ things will be new, improbable, unforeseen!‚Äù</p>
				<p>Below the human waves were still foaming, tossing, roaring, but they seemed to be very far away, and to be growing more and more distant. For she was looking at me. She slowly drew me into herself through the narrow, golden windows of her pupils. We thus remained silent for a long while. And for some reason I recalled how once I watched some queer yellow pupils through the Green Wall, while above the Wall birds were soaring (or was this another time?).</p>
				<p>‚ÄúListen, if nothing particular happens tomorrow, I shall take you there; do you understand?‚Äù</p>
				<p>No, I did not understand but I nodded in silence. I was dissolved, I became infinitesimal, a geometrical point.‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶</p>
				<p>After all, there is some logic‚ÅÝ‚Äîa peculiar logic of today, in this state of being a point. A point has more unknowns than any other entity. If a point should start to move, it might become thousands of curves, or hundreds of solids.</p>
				<p>I was afraid to budge. What might I have become if I had moved? It seemed to me that everybody like myself was afraid now of even the most minute of motions.</p>
				<p>At this moment, for instance, as I sit and write, everyone is sitting hidden in his glass cell, expecting something. I do not hear the buzzing of the elevators, usual at this hour, or laughter or steps, from time to time Numbers pass in couples through the hall, whispering, on tiptoe.‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶</p>
				<p>What will happen tomorrow? What will become of me tomorrow?</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
