<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Record One</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-1" epub:type="chapter">
			<header>
				<h2 epub:type="title">Record <span epub:type="z3998:ordinal">One</span></h2>
				<p epub:type="bridgehead">An Announcement⁠—The Wisest of Lines⁠—A Poem</p>
			</header>
			<p>This is merely a copy, word by word, of what was published this morning in the State newspaper:</p>
			<blockquote>
				<p>“In another hundred and twenty days the building of the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Integral</i> will be completed. The great historic hour is near, when the first <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Integral</i> will rise into the limitless space of the universe. A thousand years ago your heroic ancestors subjected the whole earth to the power of the United State. A still more glorious task is before you⁠—the integration of the indefinite equation of the Cosmos by the use of the glass, electric, fire-breathing <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Integral</i>. Your mission is to subjugate to the grateful yoke of reason the unknown beings who live on other planets, and who are perhaps still in the primitive state of freedom. If they will not understand that we are bringing them a mathematically faultless happiness, our duty will be to force them to be happy. But before we take up arms, we shall try the power of words.</p>
				<p>“In the name of The Well-Doer, the following is announced herewith to all Numbers of the United State:</p>
				<p>“Whoever feels capable must consider it his duty to write treatises, poems, manifestoes, odes and other compositions on the greatness and the beauty of the United State.</p>
				<p>“This will be the first load which the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Integral</i> will carry.</p>
				<p>“Long live the United State! Long live the Numbers!! Long live the Well-Doer!!!”</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>I feel my cheeks are burning as I write this. To integrate the colossal, universal equation! To unbend the wild curve, to straighten it out to a tangent⁠—to a straight line! For the United State is a straight line, a great, divine, precise, wise line, the wisest of lines!</p>
			<p>I, <span class="name">D-503</span>, the builder of the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Integral</i>, I am only one of the many mathematicians of the United State. My pen, which is accustomed to figures, is unable to express the march and rhythm of consonance; therefore I shall try to record only the things I see, the things I think, or to be more exact, the things <em>we</em> think. Yes, we; that is exactly what I mean, and “We” shall, therefore, be the title of my records. But this will only be a derivative of our life⁠—of our mathematical, perfect life in the United State. If this be so, will not this derivative be a poem in itself, despite my limitations? It will. I believe, I know it.</p>
			<p>I feel my cheeks are burning as I write this. I feel something similar to what a woman probably feels when for the first time she senses within herself the pulse of a tiny, blind, human being. It is I, and at the same time it is not I. And for many long months it will be necessary to feed it with my life, with my blood, and then with a pain at my heart, to tear it from myself and lay it at the feet of the United State.</p>
			<p>Yet I am ready, as everyone, or nearly everyone of us, is. I am ready.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
